the origin and future of the ketogenic
diet
by Dr Dominic D'Agostino and Travis
Christopherson
read by Johnny rockermeyer
chapter one
Jim Abrahams and his newborn son Charlie
the year is 1992.
in the front yard on an innocent spring
morning in 1993 Hollywood movie producer
Jim Abrahams rhythmically pushed his son
Charlie in a swing
behind him were the busy noises of his
wife Nancy and Charlie's two siblings as
they prepared the house for a
celebration it was Charlie's first
birthday
nobody was prepared for what came next
it happened in a moment
suddenly Charlie's head slumped to the
side and then out of nowhere his arm
shot into the air as if possessed by
some unseen Force
deep down Abrahams knew that something
was seriously wrong
a moment before his son was healthy and
now a fleeting instant later he was not
a series of neurological tests proved
his instincts were correct
your son has epilepsy the neurologist
told him he then went on to explain that
epilepsy although a single diagnosis
really consists of a wide spectrum of
illness from mild to severe
and within the Spectrum the seizures
that Define the disease are as diverse
as a box of crayons
partial generalized and absent seizures
comprise the three main groupings
these are then further parsed into tonic
clonic tonic clonic myoclonic anatomic
seizures
each category describes a choreographed
path of involuntary muscle contractions
that spin outward from the neurological
chaos unraveling within the brain
as some time passed tragically Charlie's
case landed more toward the severe end
of the spectrum
and it wasn't just the nature of the
seizures it was the frequency he was
having up to 100 seizures a day
it was heartbreaking to watch
Time After Time the toddler's brain was
taken over while he tried to play
in the middle of stacking a block or
blowing a horn he would pause and then
slump over sometimes remaining still and
others with a limb or two shaking
uncontrollably and then it was over and
life would more or less resume where it
left off
it was life-lived in intervals
a day was not the seamless Continuum
most of us take for granted
it was a chopped up into tiny little
slices
it was a fate worse than death said
Abrahams
the house was filled with tears all of
us all the time cried
Charlie was put on one medication after
another a process that seemed haphazard
and experimental
the odds were already stacked against
them
if an epileptic child fails the first
drug the chance the next drug will work
drops to 10 to 15 percent
nevertheless the doses were upped and
the drugs were given in combination new
with old old with new but nothing seemed
to blunt the attacks
worse the Abrahams is watched helplessly
as the drugs changed their child in the
few good moments he was spared
you pour the drugs down your child's
throat despite the fact there is
something inside you that says wait a
minute this can't be right said Abrahams
my son was so loaded at times he just
lived in his car seat he was essentially
non-functional
the abrahamses were delicately told by
the doctors that Charlie's illness came
with additional consequences
the severity and frequency at this age
would affect the development of his
brain
if left unchecked it would lead to
Progressive retardation
so it was a Race Against Time
desperate the abrahamses did everything
they could
The Physician they went to at UCLA Dr
Donald Shields was a nationally
recognized expert in children's epilepsy
they didn't stop there they sought a
second third fourth and fifth opinion
but nothing new was offered each
doctor's opinion was just a reiteration
of the last stick with the drugs
but the drugs simply weren't working
the doctors didn't seem to share the
Abrahams sense of urgency
every day was important Charlie was
slowly falling into an abyss
the doctors finally capitulated and they
turned to the option held in reserve
surgery
but the glimmer of hope surgery held
vanished once Charlie recovered and the
Relentless assault of seizures continued
with nowhere left to turn at the end of
the road the Abrahams is turned to a
faith healer
still nothing
for the abrahamses if any sort of
resignation creeped in it only served to
stoke a fire
there is no greater instinctual surge
than of protective parents
after thousands of epileptic seizures an
incredible number of drugs dozens of
blood draws eight hospitalizations a
mountain of eegs MRIs CT scans and pet
scans one fruitless brain surgery five
pediatric neurologists in three cities
two homeopaths one faith healer and
countless prayers the seizures continued
unchecked
but giving up was never an option
and so Jim Abrahams began his own
research
he began combing through books and
attending medical lectures
it was an education rolled up in a
frantic mission
then one day on the bottom shelf at the
medical Library he picked up a book
published that year by Dr John Freeman
titled seizures and epilepsy in
childhood a guide for parents the book
was written for parents to help them
cope
but buried deep inside were three pages
on a dietary protocol used to treat
epilepsy
Dr Freeman had tried to write a book
focused solely on the diet but was
unable to find a publisher so he snuck
them into this book almost as an
afterthought
within the few pages was the remarkable
claim that the diet was able to help at
least half of those who maintained it
the first impulse that ran through
Abraham's mind was bewilderment
if it had any legitimacy why hadn't one
of the five doctors mention this
treatment option by now
I couldn't make the leap between all
these doctors saying one thing and this
other guy saying something else he later
confessed
confused and desperate he had what he
felt were only two options left the
strange diet and an herbalist someone
had told him about working out of a
strip mall in Houston Texas
at the next appointment when he asked Dr
Shields which one he should pursue
Shields said flip a coin neither will
probably work and so he did just that he
and his wife Nancy literally flipped a
coin heads the herbalist Tales the
strange diet
it landed on heads so the family
traveled to Houston and met the
herbalist
they took his advice bought a grocery
bag full of herbs and returned home
after a few weeks of mixing herbal teas
it became apparent that the strange
smelling concoctions were having no
effect on Charlie's seizures
this was the end of the line
the best doctors in the world the best
drugs in the world surgery homeopaths
Faith healers herbalists everything had
failed Charlie
Charlie and his family were backed into
a corner
there was only one option left
so with only a thread of Hope desperate
deflated and exhausted the abrahamses
boarded a plane to Baltimore Maryland to
see John Freeman about the peculiar and
obscure treatment called the ketogenic
diet
oddly enough as they flew to the east
coast at some point in the Upper Midwest
perhaps over the Ohio Valley if the
abrahamses could have peered 80 years
into the past they would have looked
down and seen a train heading in the
opposite direction to Battle Creek
Michigan on board were their exact
counterparts A desperate family with
their epileptic Sun at the end of their
rope traveling to the only option left
to them a long shot
Mark Twain said history doesn't repeat
itself but it does rhyme and the stories
of these families rhymed in every
sentence and verse
but in a larger context each story
astonishing in its own right serves only
as bookmarks it is what happened in the
interim the 80 years that lie in between
which reveals volumes
critically it is a vitally important
lesson of the infallibility and
undulating path of Medical Science and a
stark reminder that valuable knowledge
even in the modern era can be lost
the story of both families Converge on a
single man Bernard McFadden
although almost entirely forgotten today
in the early 1900s almost everyone knew
his name McFadden was a Bonafide
American icon
his rise to fame was also uniquely
American he started with nothing
in fact less than nothing he was cast
into the world with the odds decidedly
stacked against him
his early years were filled with pain
and abandonment
his father beat him and his family
before drinking himself to death when
McFadden was five years old
when Bernard McFadden was seven his
mother sent him away to the cheapest
boarding school she could find because
she was dying from late stage
tuberculosis and was unable to care for
him any longer
McFadden then escaped what he called the
starvation school and fell into a series
of indentured servitudes for distant
relatives and Farmers working 100-hour
weeks and paid only in room and board
but like all American icons McFadden
fought back scratching and clawing for a
better place in the world
when he was 15 he accidentally wandered
into a newly established gymnasium in St
Louis one looked past the threshold was
all it took
inside men were grunting and sweating
while they hoisting dumbbells and
pre-formed calisthenics posters of
muscle men plastered the walls
as he stared open-mouthed and wide-eyed
McFadden was at the same time enthralled
and infected
right there he swore an oath I'm going
to look like them I'm going to be like
them
over time Bernard McFadden parlayed his
sworn oath into an Empire
recognizing an opportunity he started a
magazine called physical culture
what started as a modest Enterprise soon
rocketed Skyward with dazzling growth it
was a fresh new message for Americans
within the pages he proselytized Health
vitality and uninhibited enjoyment of
the human body
he advocated exercise healthy eating and
avoidance of tobacco too much alcohol
and white bread a substance McFadden
called the staff of death
he encouraged nude sunbathing walking
barefoot and warned of the evils of
prudishness the body claimed McFadden
was for unrestrained enjoyment
for the first time Americans were told
sex was good and was nothing to be
ashamed of
his magazines were provocative the first
to use scantily clad models engaging and
told Americans there was a new and
better way to live
he had tapped into a new Niche he had
become America's First Health Guru
forging a new culture and selling a
lifestyle he was the driving force
behind the rise of bodybuilding he
hand-picked an unknown Brooklyn model
named Charles Atlas and gave him the
title world's most perfect man and then
was the architect behind a career path
that led to atlas's fame and fortune
Americans appetite for McFadden's new
lifestyle was insatiable
halfway through the year 1900 McFadden
was selling 110 000 copies of his
magazine physical culture per month
his rapid success came with a new
cockiness
the wildly popular magazine claimed
McFadden not only blazed the path to
health and vitality now it was revealing
his secrets to curing disease any
disease his belief was sincere and
consisted of a prescriptive lifestyle
that he claimed would bring anyone back
from the throes of illness
the prescription consisted of the
principles he had been proselytizing for
most of his life exercise sunlight
avoidance of Alcohol Tobacco and diet
but the most important piece the one
imperative ingredient to pull people
from the ghostly Realm of the sick back
into Vitality was something McFadden
felt held almost magical healing
properties
fasting
McFadden's belief in fasting while may
be largely forgotten certainly wasn't
new
its restorative powers go far back into
antiquity
the Greek physician Hippocrates made
reference to the healing properties of
fasting he said everyone has a doctor in
him we just have to help him in his work
the natural healing Force within each
one of us is the greatest force in
getting well
to eat when you are sick is to feed your
sickness
incredibly the virtues of fasting or
over consumption in general went even
further back all the way to 3800 BC
an inscription found in an Egyptian
pyramid Reed humans live on one quarter
of what they eat on the other three
quarters lives their doctor
a glib quote that could easily describe
the relationship between food and
medicine today
other famous people have touted fasting
throughout history including Ben
Franklin
the best of all medicines is resting and
fasting
Mark Twain wrote a little starvation can
really do more for the average sick man
than can the best medicines and the best
doctors
McFadden embraced the time-honored
practice that had strangely bounced in
and out of favor through thousands of
years of History
perhaps the counter-intuitive nature of
sick people not eating served to pull it
back Into Obscurity time and time again
rarely would a grandmother parent or a
physician in their right mind suggest
that a sick person should stop eating it
goes against every fiber of instinct
however Bernard McFadden stumbled onto
the salubrious practice of fasting his
faith in its powers were reinforced by
personal observation and trial
while working on a farm he had noticed
that whenever an animal became ill it
stopped eating
years later one spring he felt the early
symptoms of pneumonia stirring in his
chest
he remembered the lesson of the farm
animals and cut back to a couple pieces
of fruit per day
he noticed by the second day his chest
had begun to clear and by the fourth day
the symptoms had all but vanished
McFadden's sideways entry into medicine
ultimately culminated in the creation of
a sanatorium in 1907. a massive Mansion
equipped with swimming pools gyms
Russian and Turkish baths and relaxation
areas
the Berner McFadden sanatorium he had
changed his name from Bernard to Berner
because it sounded like the Roar of a
lion was located in Battle Creek
Michigan a small town turned overnight
into a beacon for the sick
directly across the street stood the
famous Battle Creek sanitarium started
by John Harvey Kellogg whose brother
capitalized on the health Trend and
started the Kellogg cereal company
300 000 Health Seekers visited the
Battle Creek sanitarium during its 65
years of operation
every day the train dropped off a fresh
crop complaining of a variety of
ailments a portion of which now headed
to McFadden's new sanatorium with the
hope of getting well
most of those that showed up on
McFadden's doorstep had vague symptoms
like headaches weight loss digestive
problems it was really no surprise as
the typical diet of a century ago
consisted mostly of salted pork bread
and potatoes
the first vitamin would not be
discovered until 1912 and Americans were
entirely unaware how deficient their
diets truly were
also the workforce had begun the
transition to desk jobs
the combination of a terrible diet and
an activity left many Americans in a
sorry state so they turned to McFadden
to help
at the sanatorium McFadden hired an
osteopath doctor named Hugh Conklin as
an assistant
he prescribed to the same belief system
as McFadden they both believed that
medicine the way it was practiced was
largely fraudulent
together they called out the medical
establishment we will take those you
have given up on and cure them
this was fine for the mostly vague and
undiagnosable masses that showed up
after a period of stress-free fasting
hydrotherapy and light exercise in and
around the beautiful mansion they did
feel better
of course some of the more conservative
doctors pushed back claiming McFadden
and his hand-picked doctors were the
worst kind of quacks the kind that
preyed on those that were healthy but
thought they were sick
but McFadden had star power on his side
one of his more famous clients Upton
Sinclair defended him vigorously even
publishing a book titled the fasting
cure dedicated to his good friend BM
occasionally patients with very tangible
illnesses like epilepsy showed up on
McFadden's doorstep
for the detractors of McFadden this they
thought would surely be where he would
fail
epileptic patients in particular came
with a built-in yardstick
the therapies prescribed would face a
true test because of one simple fact the
number of seizures could be counted
before and after treatment thus
determining if the treatment was
effective or not
it's not clear if Conklin or McFadden
knew the history of epilepsy if they did
they would have known there was a
scattering of evidence backing the idea
that fasting would actually work for
epilepsy
in the 5th Century BC Hippocrates
reported on a man who had been seized by
convulsions a fast was prescribed and
the Cure worked freeing the individual
of seizures
in a quotation from the King James
version of the Bible Mark tells the
story of Jesus curing an epileptic boy
where his disciples had failed
when they asked him why Jesus said this
kind can come out by nothing but prayer
and fasting
and so Conklin began to count
he recorded the number of seizures
before and after treatment
when the numbers were tallied the result
was shocking and undeniable fasting did
work for epileptic patients once they
stopped eating an invisible metabolic
Levy was raised around the brain the
neurological storms that once pounded
the shores were abruptly dispelled
for some reason however Conklin felt no
immediate compulsion to publish his data
but it didn't matter nature abhors a
vacuum the medical establishment had no
good Solutions and so word of the
drugless Healer in Battle Creek Michigan
claiming to have an effective treatment
for epilepsy gradually began filtering
into the public at large as rumors of
Conklin's water diet rippled outward
from the center of the country doctors
continued to treat epilepsy with the few
drugs they had
the most commonly prescribed drug was
potassium bromide
in the mid-1800s it was thought epilepsy
was caused by excessive sexual
Indulgence particularly masturbation
in 1857 British Dr Charles Lockhart read
a report claiming people had become
temporarily impotent after taking
potassium bromide
by his own Reckoning Lockhart made the
connection maybe the drug would assuage
the sexual gluttony of epileptics and as
a result stop their seizures
the drug worked in spite of Lockhart's
faulty logic a decade later doctors
began questioning the link between
excessive sexuality and epilepsy more
likely they reasoned bromide was acting
directly on the brain rather than
through the indirect suppression of
sexual desire
bromide is a powerful sedative and
researchers made the irresistible
connection between the nervous eruption
of a seizure and the Drug's ability to
slow nervous impulses like pouring water
on a fire
in 1872 one researcher wrote the object
of medical treatment for epilepsy is to
control the over-readiness of nervous
action
for this purpose sedatives have been
employed with success
the connection was powerfully seductive
and would guide the search for new
anti-seizure medications for the
foreseeable future
the search for new epilepsy drugs was
now synonymous to finding drugs that
were sedative the two qualities were
thought to be inseparable
the next breakthrough happened on a fall
day in 1912. it happened because a young
medical student named Alfred halpman was
sleep deprived
the young German resident psychiatrist
lived over the epileptic Ward while he
was in medical training
below him seizures tormented his
patients throughout the night
he could hear them thrash and convulse
sometimes even the thud of one of them
falling out of bed
The unremitting Sounds forbade sleep
as he tossed and turned he realized he
had to try something
a new sleeping pill called luminal had
just hit the pharmacy a year earlier
during his medical training he learned
potassium bromide worked as an
anti-seizure medication precisely
because it was a sedative
it wasn't unreasonable to think that
luminal might work through the same
mechanism
in the very least he thought maybe both
he and his patients could get a good
night's sleep
and so the next evening right before
bedtime he gave each of his patients a
dose of the new drug
to his Delight hoppedman slept soundly
that night as did his patience
he would have left it at that a simple
remedy for a good night's sleep but he
noticed something remarkable his
patients reprieve from seizures extended
into the next day they didn't have any
hoppedman made the connection hovering
before him perhaps this drug chemically
known as phenobarbital could be a new
medication for epilepsy
once he published his observation
phenobarbital began to be prescribed and
slowly built momentum eventually
overtaking potassium bromide's position
as the first line treatment for epilepsy
although better at preventing seizures
than potassium bromide for patients
luminal was still a compromise
fewer seizures was swapped for a life
lived in a fog a hazy blunted state of
existence doctors assumed it was a
zero-sum game
fewer seizures came at the expense of
sedation
it was accepted this was just the way it
had to be
chapter 2. Charles howland's question
in 1921 H wrong guyland a prominent
endocrinologist at New York Presbyterian
Hospital took the podium at the annual
American Medical Association Convention
rather than the typical dry run through
mountains of grass and charts guyland
chose to tell a story
he spoke of a young cousin who had
epilepsy
over four years he watched as his cousin
tried every treatment recommended by
several neurologists including the boy's
Uncle who was a professor of pediatrics
at Johns Hopkins
the family watched helpless as every
treatment failed including bromines and
the newer drug phenobarbital luminal
the desperate family took what they saw
as the only option left a train ride to
Battle Creek Michigan to see McFadden
and Conklin
by now Conklin had treated an Untold
number of patients probably numbering in
the hundreds
guylin explained how the young cousin
fasted under the supervision of Conklin
for three or four weeks
remarkably the seizures stopped after
the second day and the remission proved
remarkably durable his cousin remained
seizure-free for over two years after
completion of the treatment
for guylin it was impossible to ignore
the result
first because of the intimate family
connection and second because he knew
his cousin had failed every other
treatment the best those in the audience
the doctors sitting before him had to
offer
so guylen looked closer he carefully
followed two other patients that
traveled to Battle Creek to see Dr
Conklin the patience guylin confirmed at
least for the time being were cured they
remained free of seizures after
returning home
then Rog Island took the next logical
step
he saw if he could replicate Conklin's
results by fasting his own patients
now in front of the hushed audience he
presented the results
after fasting 30 patients for 20 days in
his Clinic 87 percent of the patients
became seizure free
the results evoked gasps from the
audience
the rumors of the drugless midwestern
healer that publicly announced his
disdain for conventional medicine were
now staring them in the face it was no
longer a rumor guyland had casted into
documented fact
for the doctors in the auditorium the
treatment of epilepsy remained as
frustrating of an Enterprise as it
always had
surely patients with no other disease
have grasped at so many therapeutic
straws wrote One doctor
epilepsy comes from ancient Greece
meaning to seize possess or afflict
the Greeks also called epilepsy the
sacred disease and as civilizations
before them they thought it was a form
of spiritual possession
consequently for centuries victims were
treated with one pointless ritual after
the next in the 5th Century BC
Hippocrates boldly challenged the
Assumption epilepsy was divine in origin
declaring it was a medically treatable
problem emanating from the brain
Hippocrates declaration would change the
course of the disease forever thrusting
it into the empirical Arena of real
medicine
but the transition would not be smooth
his declaration started what would be a
series of clumsy barbaric and sometimes
bizarre attempts to treat the disease
The Eccentric and unrelated treatments
were a reflection of the fact epilepsy
was of mysterious and Unknown Origin
doctor's attempts to mute epileptic fits
were Patchwork of trial and error
bloodletting trefening of the skull
which is boring a hole in the skull to
release the disease removal of the
ovaries and adrenal glands countless
drugs herbs and tinctures
when the Roman physician celsus
witnessed epileptics drinking blood from
the wounds of dying Gladiators he wrote
what a miserable disease that makes
tolerable such a miserable remedy
and in 1921 as guyland gave his
presentation little had changed
many modern cures are not less miserable
wrote a respected neurologist comparing
the state of treatment in the 1920s to
those of the past
doctors still have little to offer the
victims of epilepsy and that a
non-conventional osteopath had
discovered what might be the best
Treatment available was met with a
degree of skepticism frustration and
embarrassment
the father of guyland's young cousin
Charles Howland was a wealthy New York
corporate attorney
shocked that the cure to his son's
epilepsy lies so far outside the medical
establishment Howland became obsessed
with a single question why did fasting
cure his son of epilepsy
Conklin already thought he knew the
answer
he claimed epilepsy emanated from the
intestines
he speculated that toxins were secreted
from the lymph nodes surrounding the
small intestine then stored in the lymph
system and from time to time discharged
into the bloodstream causing seizures
simply not eating allowed the toxins to
be cleared
Conklin had no evidence to back his
claim his reasoning was nothing more
than a wild guess probably pushed Along
by McFadden
along with many doctors Charles Howland
wasn't satisfied with Conklin's
contrived explanation
instinctually Howland felt there was
more to it he desperately wanted to know
he wanted an answer backed by actual
evidence
in Hope of finding an answer he wrote a
check to his brother a professor of
pediatrics at Johns Hopkins for five
thousand dollars
five thousand dollars went a long way in
the early 1900s and Dr Howland used the
money to set up a state-of-the-art
laboratory at Johns Hopkins dedicated to
the new mission
as with his brother the question quickly
became a particular obsession
the answer reasoned Howland was sure to
lie within some shift in the epileptics
metabolism to find the answer would be
an exercise in comparison
what did the metabolism of the epileptic
look like before and after fasting and
could the relevant Factor be isolated
from the noise
far too steep a task for any individual
he turned to Dr James gamble an
unusually precise and methodical
clinical chemist
the canvas for gamble search consisted
of four fasting epileptic children
he carefully monitored every known
biochemical variable as they
transitioned into the fasting state
he collected and exhaustively analyzed
their urine and blood with painstaking
detail from water loss to electrolytes
balance acid-base balance and the
Curious mention of the strange
occurrence of two ketones Beta
hydroxybutyrate And acetoacetate in the
fasting patient's plasma and urine
to gamble the compounds were a mystery
he speculated that they were meaningless
the byproduct of the incomplete
oxidation of fats nothing more than a
useless exhaust expelled as the patients
began to burn fat
in the end despite an extensive search
the report held no definitive answer
the biochemical shift that reduced
seizures in fasting epileptics for the
time being remained a mystery
as howland's team continued its frenzied
search about a thousand miles west in
Chicago the seeds were being planted to
offer up a different explanation
chapter 3. food becomes medicine
Roland woodyatt and Everts Graham both
medical doctors in Chicago were having
an argument over lunch
the waiter was already tense
their voices were elevated and worse
they had scribbled Arcane symbols all
over the tablecloth it was most likely
ruined
the argument had drifted away from the
scribblings into something more personal
your perfectionism is holding you back
can't you see that said Graham clearly
frustrated
did you know it took Lorenzo gilberti 20
years just to sculpt the bronze doors of
the baptistry of sangiovanni
Perfection doesn't care how long
something takes retorted Woody at in a
measured voice
ATT was a perfectionist in every sense
of the word and Graham was not the first
to notice
he could agonize over the wording of a
single sentence sometimes for an entire
day
Graham found this absurd a waste of time
and talent
but for the study of human metabolism
woodyat's peculiar personality trait was
perhaps his greatest strength
he was intensely passionate about the
details
he could zero in focus with singular
purpose and not allow himself to be
railroaded by the incredibly complex
Maze of metabolic pathways where others
quickly became overwhelmed
in the summer of 1921 woodyat's passion
for metabolism culminated in an article
titled objects and method of diet
adjustment in diabetes
although insulin had yet to be isolated
researchers knew that the pancreas was
the site of pathology injecting diabetic
dogs with pancreatic extract could
normalize blood sugar levels
would he at realized that the problem in
the diabetic lies solely in pancreatic
dysfunction resulting in an inability to
utilize excessive carbohydrate
at the time Physicians often fasted
diabetics until glucose disappeared from
the urine the idea being to rest the
pancreas
a normal diet was then slowly
reintroduced usually with carbohydrates
first
unfortunately the diabetics soon found
themselves back where they started with
sugar building up to malevolent levels
within the bloodstream
that fasting cleared the bloodstream of
sugar made Woody at curious inspiring
him to ask a simple question if fasting
diabetic patients resort to burning
their own fat why not just provide fat
through diet keep the carbohydrates away
and keep the diabetic in the fasted
State indefinitely
it was a simple proposal of exclusion
it was a question that perhaps should
have been asked sooner but at the time
it was easy for researchers to get lost
in the details
big questions still lingered the largest
was the fate of dietary fat it was not
clear if fat could be converted directly
into sugar
but woodyat refused to let the gaps in
knowledge lead to a dead end when a
pathway was unknown he let empirical
macro evidence guide him
in this case he knew another group had
already experimented with a high-fat
low-carb diet in diabetics with striking
success even if fat was able to be
converted into glucose it really didn't
matter reasoned Woody at
something appeared to be blocking its
conversion
he was formulating a hypothesis that had
only lingered in and out of researchers
minds but had never been concretely
suggested
once he wrote it down it seemed obvious
why not shift the ratio of the diet in
favor of fat this way the diabetic would
be able to rest his pancreas remove the
excess sugar from his bloodstream and
utilize fat instead as an energy source
the smoldering problems of insulin
carbohydrates and blood sugar were
removed from the equation
he couldn't help chastising the medical
community for their inflexible dogmatic
assumptions isolating the problem as a
tendency toward dietary group think
the universal custom of thinking of the
food supply simply as so much
carbohydrate so much protein so much fat
and so many calories without further
analysis wrote wittyat
the patient doesn't even have to be
deprived he reasoned they could consume
the same amount of total calories
in a single sentence woodyat toppled the
monolithic view of diet
now because of him diet was no longer
viewed as a concrete pillar now it was a
column built from subcategories
carbohydrate protein and fat that could
be manipulated shifted and restacked in
different combinations depending on the
needs of the patient
while woodyat was exposing fissures in
dietary preconceptions in the summer of
1921 350 miles Northeast of Chicago at
the Mayo Clinic in Rochester Minnesota a
doctor named Russell Wilder published
three short paragraphs in the clinical
Bulletin
the letter described the same dietary
Epiphany as woodyat maintaining the
fasting state by replacing carbohydrates
with fat
but Wilder imagine treating a different
disease epilepsy
it has occurred to us that the benefit
of Dr guyland's procedure may be
dependent on the ketonemia which must
result from such fasts and that possibly
equally good results could be obtained
if a ketonemia were produced by some
other means wrote Wilder
but Wilder had made an additional leap
of logic
woodyat had suggested the dietary
protocol simply as a means to sidestep
the impaired carbohydrate metabolism of
diabetics
how fasting or the dietary maintenance
of fasting work to control seizures
demanded another explanation
Wilder reasoned perhaps there was more
to it suggesting the ketones generated
from the diet might be of unrecognized
significance
after all they were the single metabolic
variables shared between the fasting
State and a low carb high fat diet
until now researchers assumed ketones
were nothing but unhealthy metabolic
debris
but now because of Wilder that
assumption was questioned
perhaps it was ketones themselves that
were pulling the metabolic levers inside
the brain of fasting epileptics
Wilder was anxious to test his theory
it is proposed therefore to try the
effect of such ketogenic diets on a
series of epileptics
it's hard to quantify the influence that
words have
attaching a name to an idea converts it
from an abstraction into something
tangible and concrete
Wilder's naming of the ketogenic diet
was to thrust it into the clinic now it
was real now it was something that could
be measured tested and prescribed
under the lamp of woodyat and Wilder's
clarifying epiphanies Dr miny Peterman a
Mayo Clinic pediatrician
enthusiastically put Wilder's
theoretical diet to a clinical test
first he strictly defined the ketogenic
diet to be tested parceling it into one
gram of protein per kilogram of the
child's body weight 10 to 15 grams of
carbohydrates per day and the remainder
of the calories in fat
he began recruiting epileptic patients
and convincing them to try the strange
protocol the scientific Community was
watching closely they eagerly waited for
the results
once released peterman's report revealed
that the diet's effect was incredible
most of the children once racked with
convulsions experienced an immediate and
Powerful remission they began to live
normal lives
the price was minimal occasional a child
became nauseated and vomited and so
Peterman found a little orange juice was
an instant fix
but most transitioned to the new diet
well and had few complaints
the ketogenic diet at first only a
fragile theory was indeed working
while running his clinical trials
Peterman noticed something else not only
were the vast majority of kids either
experiencing greatly diminished numbers
of seizures or were free of them
altogether but there seemed to be a
striking change in their character
Peterman noticed the children were
sleeping better were less irritable and
displayed in increased interest and
alertness
this was in sharp contrast to the
pharmacological treatments that dulled
and muted the children as if a wet
blanket was pulled over their brains
the ketogenic diet Peterman observed
lifted the fog
Peterman followed 37 children on the
diet for four months up to two and a
half years
all tallied sixty percent of the
children became seizure-free 34.5
percent were improved and 5.5 percent
were not improved the ketogenic diet was
a resounding success undeniably better
than phenobarbital and bromides
while the newly debuted ketogenic diet
was being studied at the Mayo Clinic
doctors on the East Coast were still
deeply immersed in neurochemical
transformation induced by fasting
therapeutically fasting had obvious
limitations
the biggest problem doctors realized is
that fasting was clearly only a
temporary solution
the seizures were greatly diminished if
not stopped altogether while the child
was not eating but of course it could
not be maintained
in some of the more mild cases after the
fast the seizures never returned but in
many cases once the child resumed eating
the seizures gradually resumed
Wilder's ketogenic diet offered an
immediate solution to this problem
the therapeutic effect of fasting could
now be extended on a patient-by-patient
basis
news from the Mayo Clinic trial quickly
spread Massachusetts General Hospital in
1924 pivoted away from fasting and
adopted the ketogenic diet as a
treatment for epilepsy
others were soon to follow
new studies tallied similar results as
the original done by Peterman and others
also noticed the positive effects the
diet seemed to have on the children
one researcher commented the diet is
well tolerated without causing any
untoward symptoms in the patients
on the contrary they seem to be more
alert and less nervous
after tinkering with the ratios
clinicians determined that a formula of
four parts fat to one part protein to
carbohydrates seem to work best a ratio
that has stood the test of time and
today is known as the classic ketogenic
diet instructions for the ketogenic diet
meal plans and extensive tables listing
the nutritional composition of foods
were added to textbooks
in response to Rising demand the Mayo
Clinic published a pamphlet describing
detailed meal plans and recipes for the
ketogenic diet
soon clinicians and dietitians at
hospitals across the country were
prescribing the new dietary treatment
for epilepsy
Untold numbers of families with
epileptic children were restocking their
pantries and adjusting their family
dinners
for doctors and the families of The
Afflicted it was probably an Easy Choice
as the only two drugs on the market were
highly sedative and the diet was the
opposite it required some work it wasn't
an easy fix but the benefit was striking
immediate and enduring for most
word swiftly spread in the ketogenic
diet became the preferred therapy for
epilepsy across the country
the results of fasting and the ketogenic
diet are apparently the best that are
obtained by any therapeutic procedure
that we have to offer the epileptics in
childhood today Rog Island told the
American College of physicians at a
gathering in New Orleans in 1928.
chapter 4 like stones for a mosaic
Charles Howland refused to give up
in 1922 undeterred by his brother and
Gamble's failure to find a definitive
answer he set out to expand the list of
experts to help answer his question
he singled out Dr Stanley Cobb the
associate professor of neuropathology at
Harvard Medical School
Cobb was a cautious and careful
scientist from a prominent Boston family
that was speculated to have entered the
neurosciences as a result of a childhood
stammer Cobb was already familiar with
howland's story he was in the audience a
year earlier when guyland presented the
case of his young cousin's Trek to
Battle Creek and the successful
treatment by Conklin
to come the story was not entirely
surprising
rumors of Conklin's early results had
intrigued him and he had begun to
investigate fasting's effect within his
own lab
when guylin had finished his
presentation Cobb excitedly shared his
own work with the attendees commenting
that he had witnessed the therapeutic
effect firsthand preventing convulsions
in Animals by fasting them
what did surprise Cobb however was that
now one year later the father of the
child guyland spoke of was standing in
his office and asking for his help
Cobb had revealed how he felt about
Conklin's work in an earlier
conversation with a colleague when he
stated that fasting treatment was
significant because it revealed the
relationship between epilepsy and
metabolism
in Cobb's mind this relationship
demanded to be explored
Cobb agreed to help Howland scribbled
out a check for enough to fund Cobb's
efforts for two years
Cobb knew the difficulty of what he had
just signed up for
he would have to tap the same dog at
grit that allowed him to overcome his
childhood stammer
to get to the bottom of howland's
question was to step into the unknown
despite Gamble's intense effort few
solid leads had been found all that was
known for sure was fasting worked
instinctually he knew he would need help
first on Cobb's list to conscript into
the effort was a Harvard educated doctor
named William Lennox
enthusiastic Innovative and bold Lennox
became interested in epilepsy after
witnessing the unrelenting and
mysterious convulsions of a friend's
daughter while studying the health of
missionary families in China in 1917.
the strange nature of the disease
stirred something in Linux
in a stroke of serendipity Lennox
happened to be visiting Boston in the
spring of 1921 and attended the AMA
meeting where guyland presented
suddenly Lennox found himself at a
turning point
he commented that he was thrilled by
guyland's demonstration and having a
compelling interest in epilepsy and its
treatment
my missionary Zeal was abruptly
transferred from Chinese to epilepsy
the timing was perfect infused with
howland's cash Cobb offered Lennox a
position
it didn't take much convincing from Cobb
to recruit Lennox
the intense curiosity simmering inside
him made the decision easy
together they launched into the problem
howlin's question was now expanded to
include the ketogenic diet that had been
defined a year earlier by Wilder
the diet was the preservation of the
fasting State and so by extension the
same rules probably applied
whatever mechanism fasting worked
through to mitigate seizures was most
likely the same for the ketogenic diet
Wilder had added another suspect to the
lineup Ketone bodies like gamble Cobb
and Lennox he dove into the metabolic
transformation that occurred within
fasting epileptic patients with
painstaking detail
and like gamble after some time had
passed they realized the answer was not
going to present itself easily
strangely it seemed every path they
followed ended with a contradiction as
if they were purposefully being toyed
with
for example guyland had noticed his
fasting patients excreted acid the more
acid excreted the fewer seizures
ketones are acidic so maybe they
reasoned it was the increase in acidosis
within the patient's blood plasma from
ketosis that was somehow acting to slow
seizures
other Clues LED them in this direction
acidifying the patient's plasma by
injecting acid directly into their veins
seemed to have an anti-seizure effect
but the problem was in the timing
the anti-seizure effect didn't exactly
track the acidification once the pH
level was made acidic it took a while
for the seizures to slow
similarly when the blood pH level was
returned to normal it took some time for
the seizures to return
this didn't match with the fact of the
induction of ketosis either by fasting
or the ketogenic diet typically resulted
in an immediate reduction in seizures so
clearly it wasn't the acidity alone that
mattered
also when they acidified the patient's
blood their seizures eventually slowed
but then after a period of time even
while the blood was kept acidic the
seizures would Roar back with vicious
ferocity as if a dam had been burst
maybe as Wilder suggested it was the
Ketone bodies themselves
to test this idea Lennox and Cobb put a
patient on the ketogenic diet
once her seizure stopped She was
injected with bicarbonate a compound
that counteracts acid
when they tested her blood after the
injection of bicarbonate surprisingly
there was an increase in Ketone bodies
but even with the increased ketones her
seizures returned with a Vengeance so
clearly it wasn't the Ketone bodies by
themselves
every time they tried to isolate the
relevant variable it would slip just Out
Of Reach
the nature of the problem was not lost
on Cobb and Lennox
they recognized what it was an
incredibly complex and interrelated
series of neurochemical alterations
the search they realized was probably
just getting started the painstaking
accumulation of apparently unrelated
facts must go on wrote Lennox until like
stones for a mosaic they are sufficient
in number to permit their assembly into
a complete and intelligible design
the answer remained a map of the world
before Columbus
the yet to be explored for beta complete
image
and the existing technology was too
rudimentary for the time being to fill
in the gaps
it appeared that Hal lind's question
like the mapping of the earth might be a
multi-generational effort
chapter 5.
them liar Hills
even if Cobb and Lennox failed to find a
clear succinct answer to howlin's
question something special was happening
in Boston in 1930 com Now 44 years old
was appointed director of the newly
formed neurological unit at Boston City
Hospital
under his directorship a Powerhouse team
of researchers all United by an intense
interest in epilepsy fortuitously fell
into place
Lennox followed Cobb to Boston City
Hospital and they were soon joined by a
harbor-trained neurosurgeon named Tracy
Putnam and a Johns Hopkins trained
neurologist Houston Merritt
Putnam and Merit met while in the throes
of a neurological internship at the
hospital and they experienced a powerful
connection forming a deep and enduring
friendship both were described as
brilliant and capable of having unusual
insights
Putman had more than a professional
interest in epilepsy because two of his
relatives won a cousin whom he regarded
as a sister suffered from the affliction
their talent passion and intellect did
not go unnoticed by Cobb he actively
recruited them into the research effort
together the group formed a tempest of
creativity
what happened at Boston City Hospital
was a rare alignment of the Stars a
group of personalities that collectively
elevated their work far beyond any
single individual's ability
an uninhibited atmosphere of infectious
enthusiasm encouraged bold ideas
a writer described the unit its roster
establishes the unit among the greatest
institutions ever of its kind
but the timing couldn't have been worse
The Fragile realization of the
extraordinary research team was almost
shattered in its infancy
when the Great Depression struck in 1930
it crushed research programs across the
country
for Cobb and Lennox when howland's cash
ran out Harvard rushed to form an
epilepsy commission so their work
wouldn't die on the vine
the program was funded by voluntary
donations which shut off like a spigot
in the aftermath of Black Tuesday
at the last second the Rockefeller
Institute stepped in
if they hadn't the history of epilepsy
treatment may have had its course
altered in incalculable ways
the group knew the largest obstacle to
understanding and improving treatments
was a lack of good animal models to
study
the current models used chemicals to
induce seizures a clumsy and
inconsistent method that gave sometimes
wildly different results
the newly developed
electroencephalographic instrument EEG
was able to record electrical discharge
from patients brains
when strapped to an epileptic patient's
head through a frantic amplification of
squiggles on paper the machine revealed
a tornado of excessive electrical
discharge
no one knew why the storm occurred where
it came from or what caused it to
disappear but the new machine identified
what a seizure was electrical impulses
firing without purpose an overload of
signal pulsating through the brain
Putnam reasoned that if a seizure was an
electrical discharge then maybe he could
trigger a seizure in Animals by the same
route by administering an electric shock
the group seized putnam's insight
using parts from an electric motor taken
from a salvaged World War One German
airplane they assembled a makeshift
machine that would meter out a trigger a
measured electric shock
after some deliberation Putman and
Merritt decided to test their new
machine on cats the idea was simple test
the cats to see how much a pulse caused
them to have a seizure then give the
same cats the drug to be tested wait two
hours and repeat the test
if the cats required more of a shock to
trigger a seizure while on the drug then
it was logical to assume the drug was
anti-convulsant
testing known drugs confirmed their
logic
when the cats were given bromide it took
50 percent more current to generate a
seizure than before when given
phenobarbital it took three to four
times more current than before their
model was consistent and reproducible
the group then made a vital observation
ever since the discovery of bromides it
had always been assumed it was the
hypnotic or sedative effect of drugs
that muted convulsions the two
properties were inseparable
the new experimental system allowed them
to test that assumption
when Putman and Merit drugged the cats
with bromide and phenobarbital to the
exact same sedative state to the point
that prevented the cats from walking and
then used their apparatus to test the
seizure threshold phenobarbital was
still much better
this teased out a critical detail
it implied that the sedative property
and the anti-convulsive property were
not chained together they could be
separated
they now realized it wasn't necessarily
the sedative property of the drugs that
made them work
this discovery Unshackled the search for
new anti-seizure drugs effectively it
removed a massive barrier that had
inhibited anti-seizure drug development
for about 70 years
the narrow Canyon researchers were
searching in was suddenly expanded into
an open field
Putnam and Merit realized the
opportunity and began to use their
animal model to test new drugs
as modest as it seems on the surface the
experimental system was revolutionary
this was one of the first scaled up uses
of animals to test drugs that might
prove useful in humans a process now
called translational medicine
given that phenobarbital was the best
drug available Putnam made a short leap
of logic he would test derivatives of
phenobarbital compounds that were
chemically similar
their animal model and method of
screening compounds was Henry Ford's
newly developed assembly line
recapitulated into the industry of drug
Discovery a Quantum Leap in productivity
before the process of drug Discovery was
mostly accidental now it was purposeful
the system vastly streamlined the
probability for successfully finding new
drugs because it allowed for screening
on mass they would be able to churn
through chemicals with Untold speed and
precision Putnam began to search he
combed through the Eastman Chemical
Company catalog looking for compounds
that were structurally just a shade away
from phenobarbital
at the same time he was calling
pharmaceutical companies asking if they
had anything that resembled
phenobarbital specifically
because they had shown the hypnotic
quality of anti-seizure drugs was not
essential he requested compounds that
were thought to be hypnotic but had not
proven to be
only one returned putnam's call Author
docs a chemist at Park Davis
at the end of April a package arrived at
Boston City Hospital from docs with
putnam's name on it
inside were seven analogs of
phenobarbital and a dozen other
compounds that fit putnam's description
docs warned Putnam of the futility of
what he was trying to accomplish
he told him his search was a waste of
time because the compounds had already
been thoroughly tested and were inactive
but docks had only tested the compounds
for the sedative effect assuming like
everyone that was enough to rule them
out as anti-convulsive drugs he was
unaware that the Boston group had reason
to believe otherwise
one of the phenobarbital derivatives
called phenytoin had been sitting on the
Shelf at Park Davis for decades
the company had purchased the compound
from a German organic chemist in 1908
hoping it had sedative properties
but when the compound was found to be
only mildly sedative it was placed on
the Shelf in a storeroom and forgotten
the overlooked compound was first on the
list for Putnam and Merit to test
they knew it had failed as a sleeping
pill and so had less of a sedative
effect than current drugs
when they gave the drug to the cats it
was clear they weren't overly impaired
docs was right it was only mildly
sedative
but when they tested the cat's seizure
threshold it left them in astonishment
the drug raised the threshold far beyond
the other known drugs without heavily
sedating them
this was exactly what they were looking
for the Holy Grail of epilepsy treatment
a drug that was less sedative yet
powerfully anti-convulsive
the early 1930s were a much different
time
Regulators didn't require pre-clinical
safety testing for new drugs the food
drug and cosmetic Act was signed in
1938.
nevertheless just to be sure Putnam and
Merit handed the drug over to a
toxicologist at Harvard and one at Park
Davis
both found phenytoin could be given to
cats dogs and rats at very high single
and repeated doses without immediate
toxic effects
this was enough to clear the path and
they started treating patients in May
by the summer of 1938 they had treated
200 adult and pediatric patients with
phenytoin now branded Dilantin and
presented their results at an AMA
meeting in San Francisco
the results were remarkable according to
Putnam and Merit Dilantin was able to
eliminate or greatly reduce the seizures
in 85 percent of the patients tested
minor toxic symptoms were reported in 15
of the patients and more serious toxic
reactions were reported in 5 percent
six days later Park Davis added Dilantin
to its list of marketed products
the rest is history the popularity of
the drug grew quickly
by 1940 it was hailed as ushering in a
new epic in the treatment of epilepsy
one doctor called it the most remarkable
and important chemotherapeutic agent in
the convulsive disorders since 1912.
truly a new era had taken hold for
epileptic patients
across the country doctors began
prescribing Dilantin as a first-line
treatment for their patients
the discovery of Dilantin did something
else it aroused and unbridled the
capitalistic Instinct of pharmaceutical
companies
they paid close attention to the
discovery of Dilantin perhaps even more
important than the discovery of Dilantin
itself was the permanent enshrinement of
the methodology established by Putnam
and Merit
the significance of Putnam and merit's
animal model was not lost on big Pharma
the companies quickly established their
own in-house large-scale drug screening
programs
Putnam and Merit themselves screened
over 700 compounds for anti-convulsive
activity between 1937 and 1945.
the massively scaled up efforts did
produce results over the next two
decades a dozen new anti-convulsants hit
the shelves at the pharmacy
as quickly as the new era of
anti-convulsive drugs was ushered in the
ketogenic diet was ushered out
Dilantin was viewed as modern medicine
at its best
it was a symbol of progress of Mankind's
continuous Vector of medical advancement
with the Advent of seizure control for
many patients in the form of a pill the
onerous diet was soon regarded as rigid
and expensive and began a sharp decent
from favor
a pill was so much easier
a pill took a doctor seconds to scribble
its prescription
the diet took time and effort of many
individuals the doctor a dietitian
nurses and the families
with a pill everyone was released
they no longer had to plan every
shopping list and meal the kids and
families could live normal lives
they no longer were cast as Outsiders
they could enjoy the same food everybody
else was having
they could now have birthday cake
pancakes with syrup and dessert
alongside their friends and family they
didn't have to watch from the sidelines
history is full of research that drifts
off like an unfinished conversation
alongside the ketogenic diet howland's
original question faded from relevance
it was a strange query from a bygone era
how fasting or the ketogenic diet worked
to stop seizures no longer mattered to
the vast majority of researchers
but not everyone felt that way
it faded from view with a smattering of
unheard protest
at the Mayo Clinic Peterman found
Dilantin disappointing compared to the
ketogenic diet
ironically years later speaking to a
group of Resident physicians at the NIH
National Institute of Health Washington
DC Dr Merritt was rumored to tell the
young doctors that his discovery of
phenytoin was a major setback to the
understanding of epilepsy he felt the
line of research started by howland's
original question of why fasting worked
and then morphing to the ketogenic diet
was a thread that could have ultimately
led to a deeper understanding into the
mechanisms of epilepsy
in 1960 almost 40 years after he was
recruited to work on howland's question
Lennox looked back nostalgically
though interest in fasting or the
ketogenic diet as a treatment has almost
vanished doubtless much scientific gold
remains in them thar Hills
by 1990 the ketogenic diet was all but
completely forgotten it was a strange
Antiquated side note that most
Physicians felt belonged in a history
book not a modern textbook
the diet was labeled rigid unpalatable
and constraining on daily life
Johns Hopkins one of the original
hospitals to help develop and utilize
the diet in the 20s and 30s barely
managed to preserve a single prescribing
physician
Dr John Freeman and his dietitian
Millicent Kelly a 72 year old that had
been administering the diet for 40 years
there was vanishingly little demand for
their services
Kelly taught the ketogenic diet to the
families of less than 10 children a year
to the doctors around the country
Freeman and Kelly might as well have
been a museum exhibit
Kelly scribbled in an old notepad
calculating ratios and jotting down
recipes for the families
together we were the keepers of the
flame Freeman later wrote
besides Kelly so few dietitians were
trained in the nuances of the diet that
when it was used it was administered
sloppily and the children often had bad
outcomes
the lessons of the past that it took
precise calculations to achieve the best
seizure control were all but lost
the bad results were folded into the
perception that the diet was old
outdated and not as effective as the
current drugs
the widespread opinion was that the diet
did not work and was difficult to
tolerate and its use was no longer
Justified
across the country its use became almost
non-existent
chapter 6. wait a minute this didn't
have to happen
as the abrahamses flew to Baltimore for
the last remaining chance to treat
Charlie's unremitting seizures their
thoughts cartwheeled between sadness
desperation and the last sliver of Hope
most likely they were experiencing the
same emotions as the howlands as they
rode the train toward Battle Creek 80
years earlier
as he traversed the American landscape
Abrahams was entirely unaware of the
rich history surrounding the ketogenic
diet as a treatment for epilepsy that it
was once the standard of care for
epilepsy would have shocked and
bewildered him even more so
for Abrahams and most doctors and
patients across the country the
ketogenic diet was dead reduced to the
equivalent of an herbalist working out
of a strip mall
when they arrived at Johns Hopkins they
met with Dr Freeman and his dietitian
Millicent Kelly
the pair seemed perfectly matched
Dr Freeman was the Maverick
he was larger than life Fearless he knew
he was considered an outlier by a lot of
his colleagues but in a way I think that
intrigued him
Millicent was the soft side comforting
grandmother-like mannerisms that were
Amplified to almost cartoonish levels
with a charming and soothing voice that
seemed to round the edges of every word
she explained the diet to Abraham's
with no time to spare they began the
diet with a jump start
they fasted Charlie the rest of the day
and into the next
by the next day when Abrahams held his
son he could already tell a difference
he just felt less intense like something
had been turned down
by the next day 48 hours later something
remarkable happened his son stopped
having seizures completely
the abrahamses returned home brimming
with optimism and Hope
days passed and then weeks and the
seizures remained at Bay
the diet had an incredibly powerful
impact
it had done what all those drugs and
surgery were unable to do it had brought
his son back from the abyss Charlie
began to thrive his mental capacity and
energy returned the house once filled
with tears was now filled with joy
the story of the abrahamses would have
ended there they would have been just
one of the ten families or so that Dr
Freeman and Millicent quietly helped
every year
but like Howland before him the
experience aroused something deep
medicine had failed them
things begin to stir in Abraham's when
he returned to his normal life something
just didn't sit well
all of a sudden my eyes opened up in the
middle of the night and I said wait a
minute this didn't have to happen
ninety percent of these seizures didn't
have to occur
waking up around the clock and pouring
drugs down his throat that did not have
to occur
Abraham's Epiphany morphed into
puzzlement and anger
what motivated him the most is that he
was in a position to prevent this from
happening to others
where Howland had the money of a wealthy
corporate lawyer Abrahams had something
even better perhaps the best resource in
the world for taking up a cause he had
Hollywood
Abrahams had produced blockbuster hits
like airplane Naked Gun and Hot Shots
if it was simply a lack of information
he could change that
so he and his wife Nancy started the now
famous Charlie Foundation dedicated to
disseminating information about the
ketogenic diet so Charlie's story would
not be repeated
on October 26 1994 the NBC news program
Dateline brought Charlie's story into
millions of living rooms across the
country
at the end of the show viewers were
given a number to call families that
called were sent a video from the
Charlie Foundation titled an
introduction to the ketogenic diet
the foundation also mailed the same tape
to neurologists throughout the country
shortly after neurologists were mailed
another video titled the ketogenic diet
doctor's version
it was a well-orchestrated plan and its
impact was enormous
Abrahams also had the Charlie Foundation
ready to fund a seven-center trial
designed to measure the impact of the
ketogenic diet once and for all
a trial would serve to demonstrate the
efficacy of the Forgotten diet for both
patients and doctors
it was timed perfectly shortly before
the Dateline special the Charlie
Foundation quietly had doctors
dietitians nurses and families with an
epileptic Child come to Johns Hopkins
and receive intensive training on the
use of The Proven Johns Hopkins
ketogenic diet protocol
the doctors and their staffs were then
ready and waiting for the anticipated
surge of new patients coming from this
media blitz that began with the prime
time Dateline special
as expected the kids came from all
corners of the country desperate to try
the new diet
four years later Freeman published the
results from 150 kids that entered the
trial
the patient group enrolled in the trial
was a tough lot
as a group they averaged 410 seizures
per month and had already failed to
improve after trying an average of 6.2
medications nevertheless the outcome was
dramatic
of the 55 still on the diet after a year
27 percent were close to seizure free 23
percent were significantly improved and
the remaining 5 percent had a less than
50 percent reduction of seizures
three to six years later 27 percent of
these same children had few to no
seizures and most were off of the diet
and on fewer to no medication
to further raise public awareness a year
before the data from The Trial was
published Abrahams released an ABC
television movie titled first Do no harm
starring his good friend Meryl Streep it
was the dramatic portrayal of a
Midwestern family's struggle to find the
ketogenic diet for their child with
severe and unresponsive epilepsy
eight million viewers watched the movie
the night it was aired
in truth the Charlie foundation's
clinical trial just confirmed the
results of the 13 other studies that had
been performed since Wilder first
purposed the diet as a treatment in
1921. the only difference this time
because of Jim Abraham's elegantly
choreographed media campaign was that
people were actually paying attention
the study was presented at the annual
American epilepsy Society in 1996.
before the study was presented the
ketogenic diet was almost never
mentioned at the annual Gathering but
this time combined with the media
Firestorm it precipitated an avalanche
of research the following year and only
grew in the years after that the
ketogenic diet had been resurrected as
quickly as it had fallen because of the
discovery of Dilantin now it had been
revived by a passionate family and their
sick child
7 minutes and 55 seconds into the
Dateline special featuring Charlie's
story Charlie's doctor Donald Shields
said something important
the reporter asked Dr Shields you had
some knowledge this diet was probably
working back at Johns Hopkins Dr Shields
and Dr Freeman were actually good
friends yet you dissuaded the Abrahams
from attempting it how come
Dr Shields paused looked at the ceiling
and said well because I don't think we
had exhausted all of the medical
approaches yet there were actually other
medications we hadn't tried yet drawing
a distinction between so-called medical
approaches and the ketogenic diet
reveals volumes of the way many doctors
view the dietary protocol
something existing outside of the realm
of real medicine something strange
non-conventional and alternative
why else would the diet have faded into
complete obscurity in the first place
even today the diet is rarely used as a
first line treatment it is still
something held in reserve epilepsy is
almost always treated first with drugs
medication will make half of the patient
seizure free for an extended period of
time but if a patient doesn't respond to
the first drug the odds rapidly diminish
in these cases a second drug will only
make an additional 14 seizure free
if that drug fails then the likelihood
of seizure control using drugs Falls to
about one to two percent
remarkably even with the most recent
anti-seizure drugs these ratios have
remained essentially the same throughout
the century as if some fundamental
barrier cannot be breached by drugs
alone
so that leaves more than 30 percent of
epileptic patients without seizure
control even with the latest and best
medications
before Abrahams pulled the diet from
obscurity these patients had nowhere to
turn
today this is where the ketogenic diet
is typically used as an option of Last
Resort
for the over 30 percent of patients with
uncontrolled seizures after failing drug
therapy the ketogenic diet is a godsend
if maintained properly it renders half
of this desperate group either
completely or extremely close to seizure
free
these incredible results have been shown
consistently in study after study
throughout the 20th century
in addition most kids who use the diet
can transition back to a normal Western
diet after two years never needing drugs
again and remain seizure-free
after combing through the statistics an
inevitable question arises why is the
diet only held as an option of Last
Resort
one can't help but wonder which is
better as a first line treatment drugs
or the ketogenic diet
to be sure the comparisons from trials
alone are not Apples to Apples a direct
head-to-head comparison has never been
done the answer to this question remains
unknown
however there is a very important
difference between the studies of
anti-seizure drugs and the ketogenic
diet all of the modern studies of the
ketogenic diet use a patient population
that has failed drug treatment
the dietary trials have a built-in bias
from the starting line
the tests done on the ketogenic diet are
enrolled with the hardest cases patients
with gritty embedded seizures that
refuse to be blunted by the best
medications available
you've already peeled off the easiest
cases it's like running a 100-yard dash
with a weight chain to your leg said Dr
James Wheelis a pediatric neurologist
and a recognized expert on the use of
the ketogenic diet
even in the face of such difficult odds
the ketogenic diet shows incredible
results
of course any comparison of a special
diet versus drugs must also include side
effects
even modern drugs aren't completely
benign when Charlie was saturated in
anti-seizure drugs Abrahams described
him as a zombie who lived in his car
seat
although technology has continued to
separate the sedative effect and the
anti-seizure effect it is not perfect
drugs often leave patients lethargic
dizzy and with double vision
rashes appear weight gain abnormal liver
function kidney stones and constipation
the biggest difference between
anti-seizure medication and the
ketogenic diet occurs in the brain
indeed the brain is Ground Zero in the
debate of diet versus drugs
the side effects that occur from
medication are not there in the diet
in fact the opposite occurs
doctors today notice the same Mental
effects as the original pioneers of the
diet back at the beginning of the 20th
century increased alertness improved
Behavior reduced anxiety and depression
how the patient experiences life is
markedly different between drugs and the
diet a variable that defies
quantification
the strict form of the diet is not
without some issues
side effects do occur but they are very
minor including changes in lipid
profiles kidney stones constipation and
a subtle slowing of growth
however improvements in the diet
formulation macronutrient sources
supplements and interventions have
greatly diminished lipid abnormalities
constipation and kidney stones
a 2010 study at Johns Hopkins followed
the outcomes of children treated with
the ketogenic diet from 1993 to 2008 and
found almost no long-term adverse
effects
the only obvious effect was growth
height was found to be reduced by five
centimeters from the expected average
all other laboratory values were normal
most importantly the study found the
subjects had continued to either
maintain or improve on seizure control
even into adulthood
most of the families had few regrets and
would recommend the diet to others
all added up results combined with side
effects many experts in the field give a
nod to the ketogenic diet when directly
compared to drugs
they feel the diet is often simply the
best medical option
no anti-convulsive drugs have that rate
of beneficial effect wrote Dr Freeman
despite the heroic efforts of Abraham's
his wife Nancy and the Charlie
Foundation the ketogenic diet is today
still underutilized when an epileptic
child enters a neurologist's practice
the typical scenario goes like this the
patient is prescribed a first-line drug
as stated above this works about half of
the time
for the half that fail to respond the
neurologist will prescribe another drug
this time the drug Works in about one in
seven kids
it doesn't matter which drug is chosen
the statistics remain the same
for the kids that don't respond to the
second drug the neurologist will now
almost always try a third
the chance the third drug will work now
Falls to one percent
this leaves over one in three kids that
come back to the neurologist office in a
desperate situation after having failed
three drugs
the neurologist now has a decision to
make
according to a 2008 Special Report
issued by a Consortium of 26 World
recognized experts using the ketogenic
diet from nine countries this is
precisely where the diet should be
prescribed after the failure of two to
three drugs
at this point the data begs to be heard
the ketogenic diet will make over half
of this desperate group of kids either
entirely or very close to seizure-free
the other half simply can't or won't
maintain the diet for a variety of
reasons either they find the diet isn't
working or it's too hard to maintain
prescribing a fourth drug has a
vanishingly small chance of working yet
strangely in many cases the neurologist
will keep going writing script after
script for more and more drugs many
doctors never suggesting the diet the
same Dreadful Place Charlie and his
family found themselves
when I asked Jim Abrahams if Charlie's
story still happens today he responded
in a sober tone sadly yes
and in many ways it's worse the reason
is because there are more drugs
the Physicians frequently say well there
is another drug let's try that instead
from what we see from those who contact
us I don't know the exact Statics but
rarely is the diet prescribed after the
failure of two or three medications
why the diet continues to be
marginalized is a poignant question
it's a culture shift said Dr Willis the
mindset today is to take a pill and be
done
if the diet was in pill form it would be
the best Treatment available
it raises an important question
are we as a culture both patients and
Physicians willing to marginalize an
incredibly effective therapy at the
expense of some convenience the question
is especially relevant considering the
price paid is so incredibly High
one of the things that pisses me off the
most is that the whole degree of
difficulty thing is just stupid it's not
a medical question said Abrahams when
you're holding your kid while he has
hundreds of seizures a day and then you
find out doctors aren't giving you all
the information
because they think it's too difficult
where in medical school did they teach a
course on what's considered too
difficult for the parents of a
critically ill child
to get this right is not trivial
epilepsy affects 65 million people
across the globe almost one percent of
the world's population
the most updated statistic released by
the CDC claim one in 26 people will
develop epilepsy at some point in their
life
despite extensive testing over half of
all cases are idiopathic meaning no
reason for the illness can be found it
mostly affects children but can also
affect adults the chances increasing
with age
it is a terrifying disease because there
are so many unknowns
still today after centuries of
Investigation researchers cannot tell
you exactly what a seizure is where it
comes from or why it stops words crop up
like multifactorial and network effect
which although true are really a way of
saying we don't know exactly a bucket to
throw very difficult problems in
epilepsy erodes at the edges of Life
interrupting stealing and isolating its
victims
it is not passive
over time if severe enough epilepsy
won't allow the brain to develop
correctly it is a tremendous burden for
societies across the globe
and to let an extraordinary therapy
remain under prescribed because an
undefined apathy this is tragic and
deserves an explanation
near the end of the Dateline special
featuring Charlie's Story the reporter
asked Dr Shields a final question Dr
Freeman tells us that 50 to 70 percent
of the patients that come through his
doors and get put on the ketogenic diet
have success can you think of any drugs
in these hard cases that have 50 to 70
percent success rates
Dr Shields again looked to the ceiling
before answering probably not anything
that comes up to that level
after some reflection Dr Shields
backpedaled and came up with a possible
explanation for this astonishing
situation a reason why the diet is so
often ignored
there is no big drug company behind the
ketogenic diet and there will never be
unless somebody starts marketing sausage
and eggs with cream sauce on it as a
drug
Abrahams agrees with Dr Shield's
assessment about why the diet remains in
the shadows it's not in the form of a
pill it can't be administered with a
scalpel and the only people who profit
from the ketogenic diet are the patients
said Abrahams
at the front line of the Charlie
foundation's efforts is their head
nutritionist Beth zupik Kania
over her 24 years with the Charlie
Foundation Beth has trained dietitians
in 10 countries and treated thousands of
epileptic patients around the world
perhaps more than anyone she has
witnessed the power of the ketogenic
diet to treat epilepsy firsthand
typically when she sees a patient they
are on at least two anti-seizure drugs
have failed many more are sick
frustrated and exhausted
the patients that finally turn to the
diet do so for more than one reason said
zupik Kania their seizures continue
unabated or they are experiencing such
severe side effects that they are
essentially non-functional or both
sadly it's usually both
are left simmering in a state of
pronounced lethargy because of the drugs
some drugs are worse than others
the worst drug is Topamax said zupic
kanea the nickname that the doctors call
it behind the backs of patients is dope
A-MAX because it makes you feel so Dopey
the patients can't think of words that
they used to know
with the diet she says that parents
often notice a marked mental Improvement
once the child achieves ketosis
and this Improvement occurs while the
patients are on the same amount of drugs
neurologists typically won't start
reducing the drugs until the patient has
maintained the diet for at least a month
after it's clear they are tolerating it
well
the difference is striking all of a
sudden the kid is paying attention or
stringing words together kind of coming
out of a fog said Zoo pick kanea
Jim has a video of this mom describing
her six-year-old son he got up he went
to the bathroom he cleaned up and he
came back to bed and he hadn't done that
in the past year the moment he went into
ketosis he got his life back
zuppit Kania said the short-term side
effects from the diet are preventable
and researchers have yet to find any
long-term side effects
in fact she has a different take
I think these patients are healthier
because of what they are not eating
having worked with thousands of people
many of them will continue leaving
processed foods and sugar out of their
diets and are healthier in the long run
she says
through her quarter Century of
experience she has also made another
striking observation
the ridged boundaries of the diet the
four to one ratio that has been the gold
standard for patients may not be as
vital to achieving seizure control as
once thought
lots of patients probably don't need the
full-blown ketogenic diet to get better
we could probably use something far more
liberal and have the same effect and I'm
not even talking about the modified
Atkins diet which is used mainly for
adolescents and adults with epilepsy
I'm talking about a Paleo type diet
I spoke to a mom last night who said her
son just started having seizures out of
the blue and after her nutritionist
eliminated wheat and sugar from his diet
his seizures stopped immediately
I would love to spare some people of the
difficulty of the rigid form of the diet
if it's not needed
and now we're finding that just a low
glycemic index diet can really work in
some cases
there is a whole spectrum of people and
a whole spectrum of diets to meet their
needs
Dr Jung Ro of the University of Calgary
is on the Forefront of the current
effort to answer howland's original
question
for Dr Rowe the question remains as
haunting today as it did in 1921. Roe is
nearing the end of a two million dollars
five-year Grant from the NIH to find the
mechanism behind the ketogenic diet's
action on epilepsy and as with those
that came before him Cobb Lennox Gamble
and Dr Howland the answer wrote row
remains elusive
Rose estimation of the diet's effect is
essentially the same as lennox's Stones
forming a mosaic description almost a
century ago at present there are many
hypotheses regarding the ketogenic diets
action
and while each is uniquely compelling it
is becoming more apparent that the
ketogenic diet likely Works through
multiple mechanisms Dr Rose said
it's not surprising Dr Rowe and others
have yet to pin down the diet's exact
mechanism of action given the nature of
the human brain an organ with 125
trillion neural synapses just in the
cerebral cortex alone and number roughly
equal to the number of stars in 1500
Milky Way galaxies
that level of Staggering complexity
combined with the fact that the
pathophysiological mechanism behind
seizures is still largely unknown
appears to have rendered howland's
questions still out of our technological
reach
perhaps the most important realization
from Dr Rose research is a deeper
understanding of the nature of epilepsy
the scientific literature involving the
ketogenic diet strongly supports the
notion that epilepsy May indeed in part
represent a metabolic disease and that
this concept could serve as a novel
framework for the development of more
effective anti-seizure drugs Roe wrote
in July of 2015.
chapter 7 the genie is out of the bottle
even though within the largely
incentive-driven Arena of medicine the
ketogenic diet is still clearly under
prescribed today as a therapy for
epilepsy Jim Abraham single-handedly
managed to thrust the Forgotten therapy
back into the public and scientific
consciousness
before his hollywood-fueled campaign the
diet lie dormant an artifact after his
media intervention researchers were once
again stirred by the Curious power of
the ketogenic diet
Jim unknowingly resurrected a query from
a bygone era to any curious biochemist
it is still astonishing in its own right
that a simple shift in macromolecular
consumption could have such a profound
effect on brain chemistry
by the late 1990s researchers turned
their attention in laboratory space over
to the ketogenic diet with revolutionary
zeal
the number of researcher papers
containing the phrase ketogenic diet
exploded from only 225 before the year
2000 to 1400 in the 15 years after the
year 2000.
the earlier articles published were
almost exclusively about the role of the
diet in epilepsy but around the turn of
the century researchers had begun to
nudge at the margins of the diet
exploring its possible role Beyond
epilepsy
researchers for the first time began
asking other questions of the diet could
it be used to treat or prevent other
diseases
first it was cancer in 1995. it was a
tiny study only two little girls with
brain cancer but the results hinted at a
potent impact and precipitated an
avalanche of research into ketosis and
cancer as biochemists uncovered the
unique mechanistic details of ketosis it
opened new possibilities
one paper in 2003 by NIH scientists
Richard Veach and George Cahill was a
siren Call specifically it suggested the
ketogenic diet or Ketone bodies by
themselves had the potential to affect a
wide swath of pathologic conditions
precipitated by insulin resistance and
dysfunctional mitochondrial metabolism
fundamental processes that can lead to a
constellation of problems
what are the potential uses of beta
hydroxybutyrate in addition to Pediatric
epilepsy ask Dr Veach theoretically any
condition where an oxygen supply to
cells may be limited is an Avenue for
investigation the list would Encompass
almost every disease state
the paper was a foot in the door behind
which was an open-ended spectrum of
possibility
other researchers took notice studies on
physical performance Alzheimer's and
depression began in 2004.
Parkinson's disease traumatic brain
injury type 2 diabetes lephora Body
Disease polycystic ovary syndrome PCOS
and metabolic syndrome in 2005 a
myotrophic lateral sclerosis ALS or Lou
Gehrig's disease in 2006
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in
2007.
incredibly perhaps counter-intuitively
the ketogenic diet showed promise to
modify the course of one disease after
the next
the strangely vast spectrum of diseases
the diet appeared to attenuate caught
many researchers off guard
clearly the diet was able to shift
metabolism and genetic expression at
some base level that prevented
rejuvenated and protected cells tissues
and organs notably the brain from the
accumulation of disease causing damage
like epilepsy in most cases the exact
influence ketones were having on the
variety of diseases remained elusive
howlin's question became vastly expanded
the Charlie Foundation became a conduit
for the ketogenic diet's sudden
expansion and interest
the calls once dominated by the pleas of
epileptic patients made an Abrupt shift
to other diseases
now around the turn of the century when
the phone rang or an email came in it
was most likely a cancer patient or
someone with Alzheimer's or Parkinson's
or other more obscure problems
the foundation decided to evolve and
allowed itself to be led be the science
they changed their name from The Charlie
foundation for Pediatric epilepsy to the
Charlie foundation for ketogenic
Therapies
suddenly zupik Kania found herself
teaching the diet to a vastly expanded
group of health professionals
we get more calls from cancer patients
than epileptics now she said
zupic Kania has noticed the utility of
the diet continues to heave and undulate
covering additional ailments its circle
of Effectiveness surprisingly continues
to expand
I'm getting more and more calls from
people with migraines which 16 percent
of Americans suffer from
we found out the diet is super effective
for migraines
and surprisingly the other one is hot
flashes from menopause the ketogenic
diet even a liberal ketogenic diet cures
hot flashes
for most of History epilepsy was viewed
as a supernatural possession
even today vestiges of a mystical
Dimension linger we know the disease is
biological in origin but it remains an
enigma it transcends our ability to
succinctly explain it
that a subtle shift in energy metabolism
is able to exercise epileptic fits
evokes imagery of preternatural healing
a biological Force beyond our
understanding
incredibly the discovery that the
beneficial transition to Ketone
metabolism extends far past epilepsy
into unimaginable Arenas of disease only
carries this image further
as evocative as it is astonishing
the literature reflects this feeling
words like magical superfuel jet fuel
and Magic Bullet slip from the pens of
typically skeptical objective and
clinical scientists
the turn of the century marked the
transition
the door is now open to a new era of
medicine that refreshingly might have
more to do with prevention than the
never-ending cat and mouse game of
diagnosing and treating disease after
they have become intractably embedded
a game that is almost by definition
impossible to win
but it even goes beyond prevention
Ketone research has seduced us into
imagining that it might be possible to
lift ourselves onto even higher planes
of health and vitality
a bold New Era of medicine beckons
never have we asked if our health can be
elevated optimized and extended with
such vast technological resources at our
fingertips
the hybrid nature of human metabolism to
utilize ketones as an energy source was
not fully appreciated until the 1960s
and even then it was typically confused
with diabetic ketoacidosis a
pathological condition that has nothing
to do with fasting or nutritional
ketosis in general
nevertheless the two were lumped
together and the true disease modifying
potential of nutritional ketosis was not
fully appreciated until around the turn
of the century
we now know the shift to Ketone
metabolism goes far beyond the swapping
of one fuel for another hidden just
below the surface we've uncovered a new
layer of complexity we now know ketones
are absolutely profound in their impact
to human physiology
critically they act as signaling
molecules and carry deeply conserved
messages to our DNA messages that vastly
impact our overall health
ketones change the architecture of our
DNA rearranging the way it is expressed
turning on the same rejuvenating
Pathways stimulated by caloric
restriction or periodic fasting ketones
appear to powerfully reduce inflammatory
Pathways the smoldering process that is
blamed for a vast spectrum of problems
even a reduction of overall lifespan
there is a growing consensus that most
of the so-called modern diseases of
civilization obesity type 2 diabetes and
Alzheimer's cancer and many others all
Ripple outward from a central core of
metabolic dysfunction
these modern diseases once considered
pathologically distinct converge to the
same central place a place that Ketone
metabolism concentrates its profoundly
rejuvenating and repairing capacity
as Dr Veach has said ketosis is a normal
physiological state
I would argue it is the normal state of
man
it's not normal to have a McDonald's and
a delicatessen on every corner it's
normal to starve
perhaps many of our modern ailments are
a result of stepping too far from our
natural state of existence
it's easy to recognize the societal
resistance to any rigid dietary
adjustment and the research is underway
to find shortcuts
the 20th century was about understanding
the ketogenic diet said Dr Willis
the 21st century is going to be about
trying to capture its incredible
benefits in a pill
science is a building that is constantly
under construction
the progress we are making today rises
from a foundation built by others
in addition to all those mentioned in
the article the work of doctors Richard
Veach Sammy Hashem and Henri
brunengraber has laid the concrete that
we in this field all work and build on
these metabolic gurus were responsible
for opening the blinds and Illuminating
the therapeutic potential of exogenous
Ketone supplementation
standing on the shoulders of these
Giants our laboratory at University of
South Florida has been studying the
effects of Ketone supplementation on
numerous disease States physical
performance and resilience against
extreme environments
could these small molecules once thought
to be metabolic waste hold the potential
to treat and prevent a constellation of
metabolic related illnesses
do they capture the time-honored
benefits of caloric restriction or
intermittent fasting
can they enhance our health vitality and
Longevity allowing the Baby Boomers a
generation that refuses to go gently
into that good night to extract more
from life for longer
the initial results look promising the
data emerging rapidly from studies on
nutritional ketosis are compelling and
have far-reaching implications
perhaps Jim Abraham said it best the
genie is out of the bottle
the end
this has been the origin and future of
the ketogenic diet
by Dr Dominic D'Agostino and Travis
Christopherson
narrated by Johnny rockermeyer produced
in 2023 by Johnny rockermeyer All rights
reserved
this book is a charity publication that
supports the important cancer research
of Dr Thomas Seifert
you can get more information about other
books on this topic and our donations on
our homepage at keto for cancer.net